## Conclusion

The results in this chapter provide strong support for the microfoundations of my theory. I expected that repression would make individuals more willing to engage in violence. Consistent with this hypothesis, I find that while such sentiments are generally rare, individuals who have experienced a violent attacked are roughly 30% more likely than others to report a willingness to use violence, and are nearly three times more likely to report having used violence. I also predicted that repression should induce greater levels of ethnic identification among its targets. Indeed, I find that individuals who have experienced an attack are 42% more likely than others to identify more with their ethnic group than with their nation. The results hold after conducting coarsened exact matching, meaning that the results are not driven by any observable differences between the individuals who have been attacked and those who have not.

This analysis has several important practical and theoretical implications. First, it suggests that repression is often counterproductive. Presumably, governments use repression to mitigate and deter threats to their rule. Yet, my findings suggest that repression could *increase* the number of individuals using violence, and entrench identities that could form the basis of an opposition to the government. As discussed in Chapter \@ref(#theory), this makes the government's use of repression puzzling. My other findings on political participation hint at an answer, however. Repression does seem to reduce the probability than individual will vote, suggesting that governments may be accepting increased numbers of violent individuals in exchange for the opportunity to shape the electorate. Second, the results suggest that repression can trigger a vicious cycle, in which the government responds to an initial threat in a way that further entrenches the opposition, leading to ever-greater levels of violence.

In the remaining chapters, I build on the foundations established here to explain variations at the level of the rebel movement. I find evidence that the dynamics discussed here shape the formation of new rebel groups, the fragmentation of existing ones, and the formation of alliances between previously independent groups.
