Why do some conflicts have multiple rebel groups, while in other cases dissidents form a single, cohesive group? As I discuss in Chapter \@ref(intro), the importance of this question has been well established. Civil wars with multiple rebel groups last longer than others [@Cunningham2006; @Akcinaroglu2012], are less likely to end in a peace agreement [@Cunningham2009], have more bases on which conflict could recur [@Atlas1999], and produce more fatalities. In short, civil wars with multiple rebel groups tend to be among the most severe conflicts. Yet we know little about the causes of such structures. No existing work addresses the formation of new rebel groups during conflicts, and existing work on the splintering and merging of existing rebel groups produces somewhat contradictory findings (see for example Christia's [-@Christia2012] focus on power versus Staniland's [-@Staniland2014] emphasis on social structure). My dissertation seeks to fill this gap in the literature.

In Chapter 2 I articulate a theoretical framework of rebel movement politics from which I derive predictions about rebel movement structure. I start from the assumption that rebel groups are drawn from a broader pool of dissidents, which includes peaceful activists in addition to combatants. The loyalty of this dissident pool should be crucially important to most rebel groups as a source of material support, recruits, and political leverage. Rebel groups thus have an incentive to be responsive to these individuals. Failure to represent the interests of these non-violent dissidents will leave a rebel group vulnerable to competition. New recruits may look to form a new rebel group rather than joining an existing one, and entrepreneurial members of existing rebel groups may form splinter organizations in hopes of capturing the supporters of their previous organization. Thus it is the interaction of the preferences of ordinary dissidents and the decisions of rebel elites that determines rebel movement structure.

One circumstance in which rebel elites may fail to adequately adapt to constituent preferences is the onset of repression. The threat of physical violence should increase the risk of being a non-violent dissident, and in turn decrease the *relative* risk of fighting. This should lead some individuals who previously declined to participate in rebellion to take up arms. This influx of new recruits will not always be a boon to existing rebel groups, however. Repression should also tend to induce greater levels of ethnic identification, as repression is often targeted disproportionately at certain ethnic groups, ethnic groups often have militias and political organizations that make them a useful basis for organizing defense against repression, and appeals to co-ethnic states is often an effective means of securing external support. Thus existing rebel groups may struggle to win over these new recruits or even maintain their existing support, unless they happen to already place strong emphasis on ethnic identity. Otherwise, new organizations making more credible ethnicity-based appeals are likely to attract the new recruits and steal civilian support from existing rebel groups. Repression should therefore be associated with both the formation of entirely new rebel groups, and of organizations that splinter from existing rebel groups. To offset the loss of capability that results from splintering, rebels should be open to alliances and mergers with co-ethnic groups. In short, repression should lead rebel movements to both grow and reorganize around ethnic identity.

I test the micro-level foundations of this theory in Chapter \@ref(survey-chapter) using data from the Afrobarometer survey. Consistent with my expectations, I find that *individuals who have experienced an attack are more likely than others to express willingness to participate in violence, and to have participated in violence*, and are also *more likely to identify with their ethnic group* rather than their nation. Greater levels of repression at the national level are also associated with higher probabilities of ethnic identification. The results hold after performing coarsened exact matching, suggesting that there are not systematic observable differences between individuals who have been attacked and individuals who have not.

In Chapter \@ref(entry) I examine the formation of new rebel groups during ongoing conflicts. As I predict, *the probability that new groups will enter a conflict increases in response to increases in repression*. Adding support for my theory is the finding that the *rebel groups which join ongoing conflicts are more likely than others to draw their support from a single ethnic group*. This suggests that the link between repression and the formation of new groups is in fact related to ethnic identity, rather than some alternative process. Contrary to my expectations, the ethnic diversity of a country does not limit the scope of my theory --- new rebel groups form even at relatively high and low levels of ethnic diversity. I supplement these quantitative findings with a qualitative case study of the separatist movements in Burma. The initiation of the separatist movement in Shan State strongly supports my theory, as the rebellion emerged after a wave of abuses by government forces, and placed a strong emphasis on Shan identity. The Arakan case suggests several nuances, most notably the ability of religion to create divisions within ethnic groups.

I test my predictions regarding splintering and alliance formation among existing rebel groups in Chapter \@ref(realignment). Consistent with my hypotheses, I find that *increases in repression are associated with an increased risk of splintering* for existing rebel groups, though the relationship is not completely robust. I also find that *repression increases the probability of ethnically-homogeneous alliances* forming, while it does not have the hypothesized negative relationship with the formation of multi-ethnic alliances. To assess the relative importance of splintering and alliance formation, I combine the processes in a single model, finding that *repression substantially increases the probability that multiple rebel groups will be present*. I do not find evidence for my prediction that splinter organizations should be more likely than others to draw their support from a single ethnic group. Burma again provides qualitative evidence in support of my theory, as the formation of the Shan State Independence Army appears to have been driven by a desire to provide stronger representation for the Shan ethnic group. The formation of alliances among the Shan rebels in response to a counterinsurgency campaign provides further support for my framework.