## Implications

The central implication of this research is that repression can trigger a sectarian spiral, whereby previously non-violent individuals join the fighting, and existing rebels reorganize around ethnic identity. I find that repression increases the number of new rebel groups, splinter organizations, and ethnically-homogeneous alliances. Given the rarity of the latter, it is safe to assume that in most conflicts, repression increases the total number of rebel groups.^[A logit model (not reported) predicting which conflict years have multiple rebel groups without distinguishing between joiners, splinters, and alliances confirms this, as the level of repression is a strong predictor of multiple groups.] The level of repression against civilians explains a substantial portion of the variation in the number of rebel groups in a conflict, and I find multiple forms of evidence suggesting that the mechanism is related to increased ethnic identification.

This conclusion contrasts with some prominent existing works. @Christia2012 argues that rebel realignments are a function of the distribution of power between rebel coalitions and the government. When rebels are weaker than the government they will seek alliances. When rebels are stronger, coalitions tend to fragment so as to minimize the members of people with whom they must share private benefits. Her theory does not predict that splintering and certain types of alliance formation would be closely related, as I find them to be. This also contrasts with @Kalyvas2007, who expects that rebel movements will generally become more cohesive over time. I show that the trend is contingent on repression. While @Christia2012 does expect that ethnicity should form an important component of the identity of new alliances, she believes such identities are deployed instrumentally. My individual-level findings suggest that the members and supporters of rebel groups may sincerely adopt such identities, however, suggesting that rebel elites cannot switch identities at will as Christia expects. My findings are consistent with the work of @Lewis2016, who argues that ethnicity is not important to the initial organization of rebellion, but ethnic rebellions are disproportionately likely to thrive. The findings here suggest that rebellions without a clear ethnic identity should be vulnerable to splintering and losing recruits to new, more explicitly ethnic rival organizations.

My findings also contrast those of @Staniland2014, who views internal social structure as the key determinant of rebel group cohesion. I find instead that an external factor, government repression, plays a surprisingly large role in shaping rebel movement structure. To some extent, however, this is a disagreement over the relative importance of the two factors. @Staniland2014 essentially assumes that repression will occur, and seeks to explain variation in resilience to it. Still, I find that repression is generally a strong predictor of splintering, while organizational characteristics are not.

This research also suggests a strong connection between the preferences of rank-and-file dissidents and the broader patterns of rebel organization. Existing work tends to conceptualize rebel groups as the private armies of warlords [@Christia2012], who maintain control either through personal loyalty or the provision of private benefits [@Lichbach1995; @Weinstein2007]. This viewpoint suggests that rebel elites have little need to be responsive to their members. My findings that both individual preferences and rebel movement structure respond to repression suggests that ordinary rebels do in fact have a consequential amount of agency. When leaders fail to accommodate their preferences, rebel group members have exit options in the form of splinter organizations and entirely new rebel groups. This implies that there should be a surprising amount of accountability within rebel organizations. At the same time, the formation of new rebel groups is not uncommon, suggesting that rebel elites often fail to respond to their members. 

Finally, this research suggests at least one clear policy recommendation. Previous work has shown that conflicts with multiple rebel groups are especially severe and difficult to resolve. I find that repression is a strong predictor of two different processes that can result in greater numbers of rebel groups. This suggests that governments facing rebellion might be well-served to refrain from widespread repression, and instead target their counterinsurgency operations against individuals who have already joined a rebel group to the greatest extent possible. In the following section I discuss avenues for future research on why governments repress despite these the negative consequences. My results also bolster the argument that outside states and the broader international community should endeavor to protect civilians during civil wars. While doing so has long been understood to be valuable from a humanitarian standpoint, my work suggests that the potential for such policies to limit conflict severity should place them in the self-interest neighboring states and any others likely to be affected by the fighting. It should be noted, however, that interventions of this sort are not foolproof. Notably, a UN effort to create a humanitarian zone in Srebrenica, Bosnia in 1995 actually facilitated the massacre of the civilians gathered there. These sorts of humanitarian efforts should thus only be undertaken with a sufficiently large deployment to ensure the security of the civilians under protection.