## Future Research

While this project makes significant progress toward explaining rebel movement structure, numerous avenues for future research remain. These include both refinements to the analyses I present here, as well as new analyses suggested by my results.

The group formation chapter raises important questions about government strategy. My finding that repression tends to increase the number of rebel groups makes its use by governments a puzzle. Future work should address the question of why, given that repression increases the number of people willing to use violence, do governments elect to use it? It is possible that repression has some hidden benefit that outweighs the cost of additional rebel groups. My findings in Chapter \@ref(survey-chapter) that repression is negatively related to voting suggests one possible answers --- governments are essentially accepting an increase in the level of violence by dissidents in exchange for a reduction in the overall size of the dissident movement. Relatedly, while repression increases the number of individuals willing to use violence, it also provokes division among dissidents along ethnic lines. The latter consequence might be sufficiently desirable as part of a divide-and-conquer strategy to justify the former. Finally, the repression puzzle may be a result of incomplete information. It could be the case the repression offers some possibility of total defeat of the dissident movement, and governments accept the risk of inspiring new rebel groups in pursuit of this outcome. In the Arab Spring, for example, Bahrain used repression to quickly put down the opposition movement there. While the tactic backfired in Syria, the possibility of an outcome similar to Bahrain may have made it a worthwhile gamble.

Additionally, other processes affecting rebel movement structure should be explored. I do not claim to provide a complete account of rebel movement structure, but rather a probabilistic theory of what I believe to be one of the most common pathways to multiple rebel groups. Other factors undoubtedly operate in some cases. For example, many instances of splintering occur not over ethnic lines, but over a divide between moderates who wish to participate in a peace process, and hardliners who wish to continue fighting. While this phenomenon has received some attention in the context of negotiating peace agreements [@Stedman1997], there is little work that addresses the question of why and under what conditions it occurs, nor the question of what implications this form of splintering has for the type of violence that ensues. For example, are splinter groups more willing to target civilians than others? I argue that attracting external support may be one reason for increased ethnic identification following repression, but do not explore external sponsorship in detail. In some cases external states may have a substantial amount of agency, however, which merits greater attention. For example, the Gulf Cooperation Council has repeatedly sought to establish an alliance of relatively moderate Sunni rebel groups in Syria. Future research could ask: under what conditions do external actors aid co-ethnic rebel groups? Finally, future work should explore factors that run in the opposite direction, asking how rebel groups attain cohesion. The Latin American rebellions are generally much more cohesive than those in other regions. The explanation could relate to my theory, perhaps being the result of more fluid ethnic identities than are seen in most parts of the world. Alternatively, the explanation might involve the extreme levels of external sponsorship seen during the Cold War, or some as-yet-undiscovered factor.

There are also several ways in which the research presented here could be improved. The individual-level analysis could be refined on several dimensions in future work. One limitation of the existing results is their inability to identify the source of repression. It would be possible to make inferences about the likely perpetrator by matching the survey results, which include the respondent's city, to a geocoded dataset of battles, such as ACLED [@Raleigh2012a]. If most of the violent events in a particular locale are perpetrated by the government, it might be reasonable to assume that it is the source of most attacks on individuals in that area. By contrast, this would not be a safe assumption in territory that is clearly controlled by a rebel group. The use of an external conflict data source could also address the issue of temporal ordering. The Afrobarometer data does not specify whether individuals were attacked before or after they engaged in violence themselves. With geocoded conflict data one could examine whether the average probability of participation in violence or of ethnic identification in a geographic area changes after violent events there. Finally, a more robust method of causal inference that can account for unobservable sources of bias would enhance the validity of the results. While finding a valid instrument at the individual level may be difficult, it should be possible to instrument for the country-level human rights measure.

While general surveys such as the Afrobarometer provide useful data on individual attitudes toward violence and ethnicity, they do not provide tests of every element of my theory. Original survey or experimental work exploring individual attitudes towards rebel groups would potentially strengthen my arguments regarding the connection between individual attitudes and rebel movement structure. For instance, a finding that individuals who experience repression from the government become less supportive of existing rebel groups would provide strong support for my claim that dissident civilians are key drivers of change to the configuration of the rebel movement.

The analysis of new rebel group formation could also benefit from several improvements. Adding a causal inference technique to the analysis would greatly enhance the validity of the results. While I did not find oil revenue to be a viable instrumental variable, it is possible that a suitable proxy for repression exists, such as colonial history. An alternative option could be panel data techniques that facilitate causal inference without the need for exogenous instruments [@Kim2007]. A more detailed analysis of the attributes of the rebel groups that join ongoing conflicts could also lend further support to my theoretical framework. While the finding that joining groups are more likely than others to draw support from a single ethnic group lends credibility to my argument, an examination of the platform and recruiting appeals of these groups could strengthen the argument that group formation is motivated by a desire to place greater emphasis on ethnic identity. Relatedly, the relationships between newly formed rebel groups and others should be explored. Enhanced ethnic identification might lead to conflict between rebel groups of differing ethnicities. Alternatively, competition for civilian support might produce conflict between co-ethnic rebel groups.

The analysis of rebel group realignment also has room for improvement. While the findings for both splintering and alliance formation are mostly consistent with my predictions, the results are less robust than would be ideal. This is likely due in part to the rarity of both outcomes. This could likely be remedied, however, as the current analysis only looks at the most extreme instances of splintering and merging --- those which result in the formation of new rebel organizations with distinct names. A less extreme, and likely more prevalent form of splintering is the loss of membership, either to rival rebel groups, or to desertion. While this phenomenon would be quite difficult to measure for the entire post-World War II sample, it may be possible to track changes in rebel group membership for a smaller sample of conflicts. With respect to alliances, I consider only cases where formerly independent rebel groups merge to a significant degree. There are undoubtedly many instances of meaningful cooperation between rebel groups that fall short of formal integration. Indeed, a forthcoming data project [@Asal2015] should facilitate analysis of such behavior. Including these less extreme examples of splintering and alliance formation should mitigate concerns about the rarity of these outcomes. The concerns from the group formation chapter also apply, as this analysis would benefit from a causal inference strategy and closer inspection of the rationale that rebel elites use to justify the creation of their new groups.

Finally, the severity of conflicts that experience this cycle of increased ethnic identification suggests a need for research on ways to reverse the process. Increased sectarianism can increase conflict severity, and as we have seen in places such as Afghanistan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, can hinder the prospects for lasting peace. Preventing repression is an obvious policy recommendation of this research. Yet, that is more easily said than done, and is of little use in cases where it has already occurred. The most commonly cited factor that can increase national unity is external conflict [@Tilly1992; @Gibler2012]. Obviously, however, this is not a tenable solution. A few studies have suggested that economic development might promote national identities at the expense of ethnic ones [@Miguel2004b], but much more research is needed in this area.