## Conclusion {#realignment-conclusion}

In this chapter I test whether my theory extends to the realignment of existing rebels. As they often depend heavily on them for material, rebels should respond to the increased ethnic identification of dissident civilians in the wake of repression. Repression should be associated with increased instances of both splintering and alliance formations, as rebels reorganize around ethnic identity.

Due in part to the rarity of both categories of events, the statistical results in this chapter are not as robust as in previous chapters. Still, the findings are consistent with the theory that repression triggers a cycle of reorganization around ethnic identity among rebels. I find that repression substantially increases the probability that existing rebel groups will splinter, as I predict in *H6*. Contrary to my expectation in *H7*, however, multi-ethnic groups are not more prone to this phenomenon than others. I also do not find support for *H8*, which predicts that splinter organizations should be likelier than others to draw support from a single ethnic group. A qualitative analysis of the Shan separatist movement in Burma suggests that my proposed mechanism does occur. However, it appears that there are other pathways to splintering that my current set of control variables do not capture. The results in my analysis of alliance formation are somewhat more favorable to my theory. Consistent with *H9*, I find that repression is associated with an increased probability of new mono-ethnic alliances. While I do not find the hypothesized negative relationship between repression and multi-ethnic alliances (*H10*), the relationship is null, suggesting that the two categories of alliances do emerge from different processes.

These results suggest that repression can trigger a realignment of existing rebel organizations around ethnic identity, though the robustness of the results is limited by the fact that both splintering and alliance formation are rare outcomes, and several other pathways to these outcomes appear to exist. Still, my proposed causal chain in this portion of the theory is rather long, with rebels responding to the way in which civilians respond to repression. To find significant results at all is perhaps surprising. Especially counterintuitive is the fact that both splintering and certain types of alliance formation are both related to repression. This suggests that repression does not necessarily alter the aggregate number of rebel groups in a conflict, but does reconfigure them. This contrasts with existing conceptions of rebel movement structure, which tend to view conflicts as trending consistently toward greater fragmentation or greater integration of rebels, but not both simultaneously [e.g. @Kalyvas2006; @McLauchlin2012].