## The Contribution of this Project

First and foremost, this project advances our understanding of a subset of civil wars that is crucially important for the reasons outlined above. This research explains three processes that account for most of the variation in the number of rebel groups in a conflict --- the entry of new groups, and the splintering and mergers of existing ones. This dissertation is among the first projects to directly address the first phenomenon of new rebel groups joining ongoing conflicts. Existing work either considers the formation of new rebel groups (i.e. groups that were not previously contained within another violent organization) only in cases where it is coterminous with conflict initiation [e.g. @Lewis2016], or in the context of contagion into previously peaceful areas [e.g. @Lane2016]. Yet, I find that 27.5% of rebel groups active since World War II were neither present from the beginning of the conflict, nor is there any evidence that they descended from existing rebel groups. An important contribution of this dissertation, then, is explaining this common but mostly ignored phenomenon.

While splintering and alliance formation have been the subject of several prior studies, my findings largely contrast with existing work. @Christia2012 argues that realist power politics calculations drive both alliance formation and splintering. @Asal2012 and @Staniland2014 suggest that organizational structure is the key determinant of rebel cohesiveness. I find no evidence for this, however, as rebel group centralization is not related to splintering in my analyses. Furthermore, my argument offers much clearer predictions than existing work regarding the timing of splintering and alliance formation, and regarding the choice of alliance partners. Additionally, the existing research is largely based on a small number of case studies disproportionately drawn from the Middle East and South Asia. While these conflicts are undeniably complex, they are outliers in terms of both their long duration and high degree of international intervention. I test my theory on a sample of all civil wars since 1946, demonstrating that it is widely applicable.

I also build upon the existing literature by unifying explanations of group formation, splintering and alliances into a more comprehensive theory of rebel movement structure. I argue that all three processes reflect the level of ethnic identification by dissidents, with repression driving changes to this trait. Connecting these phenomenon under a single framework provides a clear delineation of the similarities and differences in the processes through which each type of group emerges. Either implicitly through its treatment of them as distinct phenomena, or explicitly through its theoretical arguments, previous work suggests that these phenomena are largely unrelated. Considering these processes jointly also allows me to make predictions regarding the overall number of rebel groups active in a conflict, as I do in Chapter \@ref(realignment).

My findings also suggest several important second-order implications. One is that rebellion seems to be more political and more responsive to the preferences of rank-and-file dissidents than much of the existing literature would suggest. A substantial number of scholars view civil war as largely apolitical, instead being driven by material greed [@mueller00; @Collier2004] or personal animosities [@Kalyvas2006]. I argue that dissidents have strong preferences over the content of rebellion, and find that repression tends to induce stronger preferences for rebel groups that represent the interests of a particular ethnic group. While I cannot rule out the possibility that rebellions are initially driven by material considerations, as war initiation is beyond the scope of this study, my findings do suggest that civil war violence tends to have a politicizing effect over time. I discuss the literature on rebel motives in greater detail later in this chapter.

This work also suggests that governments can exert a powerful influence on the structure of dissident organizations, as repression can heighten the salience of identities that divide dissidents. This contrasts with the most existing accounts of rebel movement structure, which tend to focus on factors mostly internal to the rebel movement such as relative power among rebel factions [@Christia2012], or the strength of pre-war social ties among dissidents [@Staniland2014]. It also raises several interesting questions about government strategy in the face of dissent. My findings suggest that repression expands the pool of individuals willing to fight, which in a vacuum makes government repression puzzling. It is also unclear whether the other key consequence of repression I identify --- the increased salience of ethnic identity --- is a desirable outcome for the government. On one hand it could form the basis of an effective divide-and-conquer strategy. On the other hand, fighting multiple opponents could complicate the logistics of counterinsurgency, threaten the credibility of negotiated settlements, and undermine the prospects of a stable resolution to the conflict. While this calculation merits greater consideration that I am able to give it in this dissertation, my findings in Chapter \@ref(survey-chapter) suggest that repression may be aimed at deterring dissidents from political activities other than rebellion, such as voting.

To test my hypotheses, I collected data on the origins of rebel groups. This allows me to distinguish between groups that splintered from existing rebel groups, groups engaging in violence for the first time, and coalitions of previously active groups. I suspect that the causal factors behind the emergence of each of these types are related, but as the processes are quite distinct they should be studied separately. Though I do not make much of the distinctions in this project, the data also distinguish between several categories of groups that were not previously engaged in rebellion, including political organizations, religious organizations, apolitical militias, and factions of the regime military. These categories should be useful for a variety of future studies on topics such as the durability of rebel groups, their probability of victory, and their treatment of civilians.

In addition to resolving a gap in the scholarly literature, a better understanding of rebel movement structure is of value to policymakers. As noted above, conflicts with multiple rebel groups are among the most severe. Simply being able to predict which conflicts are likely to become severe through this mechanism has several useful applications. Policymakers might be able to identify early on the conflicts that are most likely to benefit from peace operations. Humanitarian organizations could predict which conflicts are likely to produce large numbers of refugees, and distribute resources accordingly. This work also be the possibility of moving beyond prediction and solving the underlying problem. As the empirical analyses identify the repression of civilians as a key mechanism driving conflict complexity, it stands to reason that protecting civilians might be an especially valuable undertaking for non-governmental organizations or outside states.

In the next section I situate my dissertation in the literature to which it is most closely related. I explain in greater detail my contributions over the existing work on rebel structure, and also discuss the implications of this work for the literatures on repression and ethnic identification.
