Why do some civil wars have multiple rebel groups, while others have only one? Theories of civil war tend to focus on individual- or group-level motives [e.g. @gurr70; @Collier2004] or opportunities [e.g. @fearonlaitin03] for rebellion, while giving little attention to the organization of dissent into rebel groups and coalitions. Even those studies which do explicitly consider rebel group formation tend to focus on group attributes such as treatment of civilians [e.g. @Weinstein2007], and do not consider the structure of the rebel movement that emerges. Yet, at least two rebel groups are simultaneously active at some point in 44% of civil conflicts.^[Source: @Pettersson2015a.] Over the course of the Chadian Civil War, for instance, 25 distinct rebel groups appeared over the course of the conflict. Conflicts in Afghanistan in the 1980's, Somalia in the 1990's, Sudan in the 2000's have been similarly complex. The ongoing civil war in Syria is contested by at least two dozen armed groups. Even ethnically-homogeneous, geographically-concentrated populations with common goals, such as the Karen secessionist movement in Myanmar, often fragment into multiple rebel groups. Furthermore, the number of groups operating in these conflicts often varies greatly over time. Returning to the Syrian example, the opposition was largely consolidated under the banner of the Free Syrian Army early in the conflict, later splintered into dozens of factions largely on the basis of religion, and now is again reducing in complexity as groups merge or are defeated.

Several studies examine the implications of rebel movement structure. Generally, these works find that fragmented rebel movements are associated with particularly concerning conflict attributes. Conflicts with multiple rebel groups last longer than dyadic competitions, as the increased number of veto players complicate the negotiation of peaceful settlements [@Cunningham2006; @Cunningham2009; @Akcinaroglu2012a], and create the possibility of peace being spoiled by extreme factions [@Stedman1997]. Relatedly, @Cunningham2009 find that the presence of multiple government-rebel dyads decreases the likelihood that a conflict will end with a peace agreement, while increasing the likelihood of rebel victory. @Findley2012 find this effect to be conditional, however, as the fragmentation of weak rebel movements can increase the probability of peaceful settlement. Perhaps related to the paucity of peaceful settlements, both @Atlas1999 and @Zeigler2016  find that civil wars with multiple rebel groups are prone to recurrence, as new episodes of conflict frequently occur between rebel factions from the previous conflict. Finally, conflicts with multiple dyads feature over 20% more fatalities than dyadic ones.^[Source: my own analysis using data from @Sundberg2008a.] In short, conflicts with multiple rebel groups are an unusually severe subset of civil wars.

While prior has firmly established the importance of understanding why some conflicts have multiple rebel groups while others do not, to date very few works have attempted to explain this phenomenon. The studies that do exist in this area tend to focus on a narrow subset of the processes affecting conflict complexity. For example, several recent works explore the splintering of existing rebel groups [e.g. @McLauchlin2012; @Staniland2014]. These works tend to focus on the organizational characteristics of rebel groups however, and thus have little to say about why rebel groups might form alliances, nor why entirely new groups might enter a conflict. @Christia2012 adapts realism from international relations theory into a unified explanation of splintering and alliance formation, but she too ignores the mobilization of new groups. I connect all three phenomena in a single theoretical framework, providing a unified explanation for conflict complexity. Additionally, the existing research is largely based on a small number of case studies disproportionately drawn from the Middle East and South Asia. While these conflicts are undeniably complex, they are outliers in terms of both their long duration and high degree of international intervention. I test my theory on a sample of all civil wars since 1946, demonstrating that it is widely applicable.

The goal of this project is to address a single broad research question: what explains the variation in the number of rebel groups in a civil war? I address several more specific questions in pursuit of this broader goal. Under what conditions do new rebel groups join an ongoing civil war? Why do existing rebel groups splinter into multiple factions? When and why do previously independent rebel groups form alliances?

In brief, I argue that the treatment of civilians during wartime is a crucial determinant of rebel movement cohesion. Violent repression of civilians should lead many of them to calculate that joining a rebellion is not dramatically riskier than remaining non-violent, increasing the pool of individuals willing to fight. But as repression is often applied on the basis of ethnicity, and ethnic groups often offer a useful basis for organizing defensive measures, repression should also tend to induce greater levels of ethnic identification. Thus, repression should both create a pool of individuals willing to join the conflict, and lead to increased demand for rebel groups that emphasize ethnic identity. I expect that this dynamic will influence all three processes identified in the existing literature as determinants of conflict complexity --- the formation of new rebel groups, the splintering of existing rebel groups, and the merger of previously independent groups into alliances. The results of my empirical chapters suggest that complex civil wars are often the result of a sectarian spiral --- an initial wave of repression mobilizes violent dissent and induces greater levels of ethnic identification, and the rebel movement fragments along ethnic lines to reflect these individual-level preferences. Prior work suggests that a more fragmented movement might lead to greater levels of conflict severity, closing the vicious circle.

In the remainder of this chapter I review the existing literature on rebel movement structure, as well as prior work on repression and ethnic identification. Next, I summarize the broader theoretical and policy implications of the research. Finally, I provide a summary of the subsequent chapters.
