## Project Summary

In Chapter \@ref(theory) I articulate a theory of rebel movement structure. I begin with the assumption that rebel groups emerge from a broader pool of dissidents. While not all dissidents will be eager to participate in violence, each will prefer to be represented by a rebel group which advances their political interests and provides them with security. Thus, dissidents form a constituency that constantly evaluates the performance of rebel groups, and will consider switching their allegiance to new groups if the existing ones are lacking. In hopes of seizing on this dynamic, rebel entrepreneurs will look for opportunities to mobilize new groups by appealing to underrepresented identities and ideologies. These appeals should be especially effective in the wake of repression for two reasons. First, repression lowers the risk of fighting relative to remaining peaceful, leading new individuals to join the fighting. Second, as repression should induce greater levels of ethnic identification. Repression is often targeted on the basis of ethnicity, increasing its salience, and appeals for support from outside, co-ethnic states might be especially effective in the presence of human rights concerns. Thus repression not only creates a new pool of individuals willing to fight, it also stokes division among dissidents along ethnic lines. This should often lead individuals joining the fighting to form new groups rather than join existing ones, and individuals already in rebel groups to realign into more ethnically homogeneous configurations. This should manifest in the form of both the splintering of existing groups, particularly when existing groups are multi-ethnic, and the formation of ethnically-homogeneous alliances so as to replace the loss in capabilities due to fragmentation and streamline access to support from co-ethnic outside states.

Chapter \@ref(survey-chapter) tests the individual-level assumptions of the theory. Using a sample of over 150,000 Afrobarometer Survey responses, I find support for both of my key predictions regarding the effects of repression. Individuals who have experienced an attack in the past year are 30% more likely than others to express willingness to use violence themselves. Additionally, I find these individuals are 62% more likely to identify with their ethnic group than respondents who have not experienced an attack. While I am unable to completely rule out the possibility of reverse causality, the results hold after performing coarsened exact matching, showing that attacked individuals do not systematically differ from others on observable traits. These results suggest that my theory performs as expected at the individual level.

Chapter \@ref(entry) contains tests of my predictions regarding the formation of new rebel groups during ongoing conflicts. I add my measure of rebel group origin to the Uppsala Armed Conflict Dataset, resulting in a sample of all civil wars, 1946--2015. I find that the probability of a new rebel group joining an ongoing conflict during a given year has a strong, negative relationship with changes in respect for human rights. The largest observed increases in repression are associated with more than a 60% chance of new rebel groups forming, while the probability is around 3% in years with no substantial change in human rights practices, and approaches zero in following improvements to human rights. Contrary to my expectations, I find no evidence that ethnic diversity places a scope condition on my theory; new rebel groups form in a variety of societies. I also do not find evidence that rebels groups which join ongoing conflicts are more likely than others to draw their support from a single ethnic group. However, this result seems to be driven by a large number of rebel groups with no discernible ties to an ethnic constituency, and I do find that these joining rebel are significantly less likely than others to be multi-ethnic coalitions. To supplement these quantitative analyses, I illustrate the causal logic of my theory in a qualitative case study of the Mon separatists in Burma, and use the emergence of the All Burma Students' Democratic Front to explore the limits of my argument.

In Chapter \@ref(realignment) I explore two processes through which rebels reorganize --- splintering from existing groups, and the formation of alliances. I find that increases in repression are associated with an increased probability of rebel group splintering, though the result is not entirely robust. I do not find evidence to support my hypothesis that rebel groups which draw support from multiple ethnic groups are more prone to fragmentation. This seems to largely reflect the fact that ethnically-homogeneous groups are disproportionately likely to fight long-lasting, low-intensity separatist conflicts. I illustrate both findings with a study of the Karen National Union, which originally split from the multi-ethnic Burmese independence movement to advance the interests of the Karen people, but later splintered itself along religious lines. Finally, consistent with my expectations I find evidence that repression increases the probability that new ethnically-homogenous alliances will form, while having no effect on the formation multi-ethnic alliances. Though less robust than the findings in previous chapters, these results suggest that repression can initiate a process of realignment whereby rebels tend to leave multi-ethnic coalitions and form new alliances centered around a particular ethnic identity.

Finally, I summarize the results in Chapter \@ref(conclusion), discuss their theoretical and policy significance, and propose several avenues for future research on this topic.